README.md, before:

# vcf_annotation_pipeline

A simple Snakemake workflow to annotate variant call format (VCF) files using GATK4, SnpSift, VEP and genmod. Designed to be used after human_genomics_pipeline.

- [vcf_annotation_pipeline](#vcfannotationpipeline)
  - [Workflow diagram](#workflow-diagram)
  - [Set up and run vcf_annotation_pipeline against GRCh37](#set-up-and-run-vcfannotationpipeline-against-grch37)
    - [1. Clone pipeline](#1-clone-pipeline)
    - [2. Download reference genome and vcf annotation databases](#2-download-reference-genome-and-vcf-annotation-databases)
    - [3. Set up the working environment](#3-set-up-the-working-environment)
    - [4. Run the pipeline](#4-run-the-pipeline)
    - [5. Evaluation of the run](#5-evaluation-of-the-run)
  - [Useful links/papers](#useful-linkspapers)

## Workflow diagram

<img src="rulegraph.png" class="center">

## Set up and run vcf_annotation_pipeline against GRCh37

- **Prerequisite software:** [Git](https://git-scm.com/), [Conda 4.8.2](https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/index.html), [tabix](http://www.htslib.org/doc/tabix.html), [bgzip](http://www.htslib.org/doc/bgzip.html), [gunzip](https://linux.die.net/man/1/gunzip), [bwa](http://bio-bwa.sourceforge.net/), [samtools](http://www.htslib.org/)
- **Prerequisite data:** Reference human genome and dbSNP database (see [Database downloads for human_genomics_pipeline and vcf_annotation_pipeline](https://github.com/leahkemp/documentation/blob/master/downloads_for_genomic_pipelines.md#reference-human-genome) for more information on downloading this data)
- **OS:** Validated on Ubuntu 16.04

### 1. Clone pipeline

Clone the [vcf_annotation_pipeline](https://github.com/ESR-NZ/vcf_annotation_pipeline) repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/ESR-NZ/vcf_annotation_pipeline
```

### 2. Download reference genome and vcf annotation databases

Download [Ensembl-VEP](https://asia.ensembl.org/info/docs/tools/vep/index.html) database using a [conda version of Ensembl-VEP](https://anaconda.org/bioconda/ensembl-vep)

```bash
conda create --name download_data_env python=3.7
conda activate download_data_env
conda install -c bioconda ensembl-vep=99.2
vep_install -a cf -s homo_sapiens -y GRCh37 -c /store/lkemp/publicData/vep/GRCh37 --CONVERT
conda deactivate
```

Download other databases from the [GATK resource bundle](https://gatk.broadinstitute.org/hc/en-us/articles/360035890811-Resource-bundle)

```bash
wget ftp://gsapubftp-anonymous@ftp.broadinstitute.org:21/bundle/hg19/Mills_and_1000G_gold_standard.indels.hg19.sites.vcf.gz
wget ftp://gsapubftp-anonymous@ftp.broadinstitute.org:21/bundle/hg19/1000G_phase1.indels.hg19.sites.vcf.gz
wget ftp://gsapubftp-anonymous@ftp.broadinstitute.org:21/bundle/hg19/1000G_phase1.snps.high_confidence.hg19.sites.vcf.gz
wget ftp://gsapubftp-anonymous@ftp.broadinstitute.org:21/bundle/hg19/1000G_omni2.5.hg19.sites.vcf.gz
wget ftp://gsapubftp-anonymous@ftp.broadinstitute.org:21/bundle/hg19/hapmap_3.3.hg19.sites.vcf.gz
```

Convert these files to bgzip format in order to create their associated index files

```bash
gunzip Mills_and_1000G_gold_standard.indels.hg19.sites.vcf.gz
bgzip Mills_and_1000G_gold_standard.indels.hg19.sites.vcf
tabix Mills_and_1000G_gold_standard.indels.hg19.sites.vcf.gz

gunzip 1000G_phase1.indels.hg19.sites.vcf.gz
bgzip 1000G_phase1.indels.hg19.sites.vcf
tabix 1000G_phase1.indels.hg19.sites.vcf.gz

gunzip 1000G_phase1.snps.high_confidence.hg19.sites.vcf.gz
bgzip 1000G_phase1.snps.high_confidence.hg19.sites.vcf
tabix 1000G_phase1.snps.high_confidence.hg19.sites.vcf.gz

gunzip 1000G_omni2.5.hg19.sites.vcf.gz
bgzip 1000G_omni2.5.hg19.sites.vcf
tabix 1000G_omni2.5.hg19.sites.vcf.gz

gunzip hapmap_3.3.hg19.sites.vcf.gz
bgzip hapmap_3.3.hg19.sites.vcf
tabix hapmap_3.3.hg19.sites.vcf.gz
```

Download the [CADD database](https://cadd.gs.washington.edu/download) and it's associated index file. (For now, the CADD database needs to be downloaded within the vcf_annotation_pipeline working environment/folder because of to how the genmod singularity container is mounted).

```bash
wget https://krishna.gs.washington.edu/download/CADD/v1.4/GRCh37/whole_genome_SNVs.tsv.gz
wget https://krishna.gs.washington.edu/download/CADD/v1.4/GRCh37/whole_genome_SNVs.tsv.gz.tbi
```

Download [dbNSFP database](https://sites.google.com/site/jpopgen/dbNSFP)

```bash
# Info/code coming
```

### 3. Set up the working environment

Set the the working directories in the config file (config.yaml) to the reference genome, vcf annotation databases and the input variant call format (vcf) data such as those output by [human_genomics_pipeline](https://github.com/ESR-NZ/human_genomics_pipeline)

For now, also manually set the file directory to the input vcf data in line 19 of the Snakefile to ensure the global wildcard function works correctly

```bash
SAMPLES, = glob_wildcards("../human_genomics_pipeline/vcf/{sample}.raw.snps.indels.AS.g.vcf")
```

Create and activate a conda environment with python and snakemake installed

```bash
conda create --name annot_pipeline_env python=3.7
conda activate annot_pipeline_env
conda install --channel bioconda snakemake=5.10.0
```

### 4. Run the pipeline

First start a dry run. If there are no issues, start a full run without the -n flag

```bash
snakemake -n -r -j 24 -p --use-conda --use-singularity
snakemake -r -j 24 -p --use-conda --use-singularity
```

If necessary, the maximum number of CPU cores allocated by changing the -j flag in the snakemake program. For example to scale to run on a laptop/desktop...

```bash
snakemake -r -j 4 -p --use-conda --use-singularity
```

### 5. Evaluation of the run

Generate an interactive html report of the pipeline run

```bash
snakemake --report report.html
```

## Useful links/papers

Van der Auwera et al., (2013). *Current Protocols in Bioinformatics*. [From FastQ data to high confidence variant calls: the Genome Analysis Toolkit best practices pipeline](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4243306/); 11(1110): 11.10.1–11.10.33.

Commit message:

Create simple mode of data input

README.md, after:

# vcf_annotation_pipeline

A simple Snakemake workflow to annotate variant call format (VCF) files using GATK4, SnpSift, VEP and genmod. Designed to be used after human_genomics_pipeline.

- [vcf_annotation_pipeline](#vcfannotationpipeline)
  - [Workflow diagram](#workflow-diagram)
  - [Set up and run vcf_annotation_pipeline against GRCh37](#set-up-and-run-vcfannotationpipeline-against-grch37)
    - [1. Clone pipeline](#1-clone-pipeline)
    - [2. Download reference genome and vcf annotation databases](#2-download-reference-genome-and-vcf-annotation-databases)
    - [3. Set up the working environment](#3-set-up-the-working-environment)
    - [4. Run the pipeline](#4-run-the-pipeline)
    - [5. Evaluation of the run](#5-evaluation-of-the-run)
  - [Useful links/papers](#useful-linkspapers)

## Workflow diagram

<img src="rulegraph.png" class="center">

## Set up and run vcf_annotation_pipeline against GRCh37

- **Prerequisite software:** [Git](https://git-scm.com/), [Conda 4.8.2](https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/index.html), [tabix](http://www.htslib.org/doc/tabix.html), [bgzip](http://www.htslib.org/doc/bgzip.html), [gunzip](https://linux.die.net/man/1/gunzip), [bwa](http://bio-bwa.sourceforge.net/), [samtools](http://www.htslib.org/)
- **Prerequisite data:** Reference human genome and dbSNP database (see [Database downloads for human_genomics_pipeline and vcf_annotation_pipeline](https://github.com/leahkemp/documentation/blob/master/downloads_for_genomic_pipelines.md#reference-human-genome) for more information on downloading this data)
- **OS:** Validated on Ubuntu 16.04

### 1. Clone pipeline

Clone the [vcf_annotation_pipeline](https://github.com/ESR-NZ/vcf_annotation_pipeline) repository into the same directory as a folder named 'vcf' containing your variant call format (vcf) files such as those output by [human_genomics_pipeline](https://github.com/ESR-NZ/human_genomics_pipeline)

```bash
git clone https://github.com/ESR-NZ/vcf_annotation_pipeline
```

Required folder structure:

```bash

.
|___vcf/
|     |___sample1.vcf
|     |___sample2.vcf
|
|___vcf_annotation_pipeline/
      |___envs/
      |___rules/
      |___Snakefile
      |___config.yaml

```

### 2. Download reference genome and vcf annotation databases

Download [Ensembl-VEP](https://asia.ensembl.org/info/docs/tools/vep/index.html) database using a [conda version of Ensembl-VEP](https://anaconda.org/bioconda/ensembl-vep)

```bash
conda create --name download_data_env python=3.7
conda activate download_data_env
conda install -c bioconda ensembl-vep=99.2
vep_install -a cf -s homo_sapiens -y GRCh37 -c /store/lkemp/publicData/vep/GRCh37 --CONVERT
conda deactivate
```

Download other databases from the [GATK resource bundle](https://gatk.broadinstitute.org/hc/en-us/articles/360035890811-Resource-bundle)

```bash
wget ftp://gsapubftp-anonymous@ftp.broadinstitute.org:21/bundle/hg19/Mills_and_1000G_gold_standard.indels.hg19.sites.vcf.gz
wget ftp://gsapubftp-anonymous@ftp.broadinstitute.org:21/bundle/hg19/1000G_phase1.indels.hg19.sites.vcf.gz
wget ftp://gsapubftp-anonymous@ftp.broadinstitute.org:21/bundle/hg19/1000G_phase1.snps.high_confidence.hg19.sites.vcf.gz
wget ftp://gsapubftp-anonymous@ftp.broadinstitute.org:21/bundle/hg19/1000G_omni2.5.hg19.sites.vcf.gz
wget ftp://gsapubftp-anonymous@ftp.broadinstitute.org:21/bundle/hg19/hapmap_3.3.hg19.sites.vcf.gz
```

Convert these files to bgzip format in order to create their associated index files

```bash
gunzip Mills_and_1000G_gold_standard.indels.hg19.sites.vcf.gz
bgzip Mills_and_1000G_gold_standard.indels.hg19.sites.vcf
tabix Mills_and_1000G_gold_standard.indels.hg19.sites.vcf.gz

gunzip 1000G_phase1.indels.hg19.sites.vcf.gz
bgzip 1000G_phase1.indels.hg19.sites.vcf
tabix 1000G_phase1.indels.hg19.sites.vcf.gz

gunzip 1000G_phase1.snps.high_confidence.hg19.sites.vcf.gz
bgzip 1000G_phase1.snps.high_confidence.hg19.sites.vcf
tabix 1000G_phase1.snps.high_confidence.hg19.sites.vcf.gz

gunzip 1000G_omni2.5.hg19.sites.vcf.gz
bgzip 1000G_omni2.5.hg19.sites.vcf
tabix 1000G_omni2.5.hg19.sites.vcf.gz

gunzip hapmap_3.3.hg19.sites.vcf.gz
bgzip hapmap_3.3.hg19.sites.vcf
tabix hapmap_3.3.hg19.sites.vcf.gz
```

Download the [CADD database](https://cadd.gs.washington.edu/download) and it's associated index file. (For now, the CADD database needs to be downloaded within the vcf_annotation_pipeline working environment/folder because of to how the genmod singularity container is mounted).

```bash
wget https://krishna.gs.washington.edu/download/CADD/v1.4/GRCh37/whole_genome_SNVs.tsv.gz
wget https://krishna.gs.washington.edu/download/CADD/v1.4/GRCh37/whole_genome_SNVs.tsv.gz.tbi
```

Download [dbNSFP database](https://sites.google.com/site/jpopgen/dbNSFP)

```bash
# Info/code coming
```

### 3. Set up the working environment

Set the the working directories in the config file (config.yaml) to the reference genome and vcf annotation databases.

Create and activate a conda environment with python and snakemake installed

```bash
conda create --name annot_pipeline_env python=3.7
conda activate annot_pipeline_env
conda install --channel bioconda snakemake=5.10.0
```

### 4. Run the pipeline

First start a dry run. If there are no issues, start a full run without the -n flag

```bash
snakemake -n -r -j 24 -p --use-conda --use-singularity
snakemake -r -j 24 -p --use-conda --use-singularity
```

If necessary, the maximum number of CPU cores allocated by changing the -j flag in the snakemake program. For example to scale to run on a laptop/desktop...

```bash
snakemake -r -j 4 -p --use-conda --use-singularity
```

### 5. Evaluation of the run

Generate an interactive html report of the pipeline run

```bash
snakemake --report report.html
```

## Useful links/papers

Van der Auwera et al., (2013). *Current Protocols in Bioinformatics*. [From FastQ data to high confidence variant calls: the Genome Analysis Toolkit best practices pipeline](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4243306/); 11(1110): 11.10.1–11.10.33.
